JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
protesting the Kremlin.
Hundreds of demonstrators
are detained during
massive opposition
rallies across Russia.
Also ahead, I sit down with the
former senior American diplomat
in China in his first interview
since resigning in protest after
President Trump's withdrawal
from the Paris climate
accord.
And inside the Islamist militant
group Hezbollah - - a look at
its growing power and roots in
Lebanon and its future in a
shifting political landscape.
JANE FERGUSON: The Trump
administration has talked tough
about containing Iran, but given
little explanation of how it
would play a role in curbing
Iran and its ally here in
Lebanon Hezbollah, while
continuing to fight the
common enemy of ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then,
it's Politics Monday.
Tamara Keith and Stu
Rothenberg look ahead to
a busy week, including
tomorrow's congressional
testimony from Attorney
General Jeff Sessions.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
isn't saying tonight whether
tape recordings do exist of
President Trump's
conversations with former
FBI Director James Comey.
Over the weekend, several
Republican senators
urged the president to
answer that question,
yes or no.
At the White House
today, reporters pressed
Press Secretary Sean
Spicer on the subject.
SEAN SPICER, White House
Press Secretary: I think the
president made it very clear on
Friday that he would get back as
soon as possible on this and his
position on that conversation.
QUESTION: Right, but
what is he waiting for?
What's the delay?
SEAN SPICER: He's waiting --
he's not waiting for anything.
When he's ready to further
discuss it, he will.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Spicer also
wouldn't say if Attorney General
Jeff Sessions will invoke
executive privilege when
he goes before a Senate
committee tomorrow.
Sessions faces questions
about his contacts with
Russia's ambassador
during the presidential
race.
A second U.S. appeals court
has upheld a block on President
Trump's modified travel ban.
In Seattle today, three judges
of the Ninth Circuit Court
agreed with a ruling by a lower
court in Hawaii that the ban
discriminates against Muslims.
A federal appeals court
in Virginia already
issued a similar ruling
in a separate case.
The attorneys general of
Maryland and the District of
Columbia charged today that the
president's ongoing business
ties violate the Constitution.
They sued in federal court,
citing the Emoluments
Clause, designed to
head off conflicts of
interest.
In Washington, the two
officials, both Democrats,
said it's a matter
of saving democracy.
KARL A. RACINE, D.C. Attorney
General: We're concerned that
foreign governments are coming
to the Trump businesses for
the single purpose of currying
special favor from the president
of the United States, so that
their interests can get a higher
priority than the interests
of the American people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A White House
spokesman said the suit is
motivated by partisan politics.
A similar lawsuit is
pending in New York state.
The White House also condemned
Russia's crackdown today on
protesters against corruption.
More than a thousand people were
arrested across the country.
Alex Thomson of
Independent Television
News filed this report.
ALEX THOMSON: Hundreds arrested
in Moscow alone on a day of
protests nationwide against
corruption generally and
Vladimir Putin particularly.
"Putin is a thief," the chant,
and "Russia without Putin"
-- all of this organized by
the Kremlin's most
prominent critic by
far, the anti-corruption
campaigner and presidential
hopeful Alexei Navalny.
If Navalny's plan was to rain
on President Putin's parade,
it's certainly succeeding
in this part of
the demonstration.
Thousands of people gathered
here, plainly the vast majority
of them here pro-Navalny.
MAN (through translator):
Putin is killing our people.
He's killing you and me.
He's sending people to
Ukraine and Syria to
die for his interests.
Let's tell him
we're not having it.
WOMAN (through translator):
I came here for the truth.
Our government is not
conducting itself properly.
ALEX THOMSON: Navalny was
allowed to demo in Moscow,
just not here, on the main road
leading straight
up to Red Square.
But late last night, he
ordered his people to
this illegal location.
That made confrontation
inevitable.
"Muscovites," he told people
in a late-night appeal,
"come to Tverskaya Street.
Don't go anywhere else."
Alexei Navalny himself never
made it to his own protest,
arrested at his home in Moscow.
He could now be detained
for up to 30 days.
Across Moscow, as across
Russia, these were the official
independence day celebrations,
the kind the Kremlin wanted
people to see and, let's
face it, most Russians.
Putin remains hugely popular.
Navalny's support runs
at just 2 percent.
WOMAN (through translator):
I don't think protesting
today makes any sense.
People are celebrating.
They're happy.
Why spoil the mood?
ALEX THOMSON: This was
Vladivostok demonstrations
and arrests well before
most of Moscow had
even got up this morning,
north to Siberia, Novosibirsk,
and another of more than 200
cities where anti-corruption
protesters gathered, and
west to St. Petersburg,
the same pattern,
gathering chanting
and arresting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And back in this
country, newly elected Montana
Congressman Greg Gianforte
will not go to jail after all
for assaulting a reporter.
The Republican pleaded
guilty today to a misdemeanor
charge, and was sentenced
to 40 hours of community
service.
He will also attend 20 hours
of anger management counseling
and pay a fine of $385.
A Pennsylvania jury has
begun deliberating in Bill
Cosby's sexual assault trial.
The defense rested
abruptly today.
Cosby himself, accompanied
by his wife for the first
time, declined to testify.
His defense team argued the
comedian and his accuser had
a consensual relationship.
Prosecutors argued that
Cosby drugged the woman.
In Orlando, Florida, today,
they remembered the deadliest
mass shooting in modern U.S.
history.
A gunman, Omar Mateen, killed
49 people at a gay nightclub
last June 12, before police
killed him.
He'd pledged allegiance to
the Islamic State group.
This morning, a vigil
began at 2:00 a.m., the
same hour as the rampage.
Names of the victims were read
aloud, and hundreds carried
candles and laid flowers.
BUDDY DYER, Mayor of Orlando,
Florida: We are not here to
relive the horror of that
day.
We're here for a
greater purpose.
We're here to remember the
innocent lives that were lost.
We're here to honor them.
Orlando has been anointed to
show the world how to combat
hatred and evil and promote
quality and embrace diversity.
And we don't just have the
opportunity to do this.
We now have the
responsibility to do this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The owner of
the Pulse nightclub said that
she plans to turn the site into
a memorial.
The U.S. Interior Department
is recommending the Bears Ears
National Monument in Utah be
downsized.
It now covers 1.3 million acres.
President Trump has said
the protective designations
amount to -- quote --
"a massive federal land
grab."
He's ordered reviews of Bears
Ears and 27 other sites.
Wall Street's week is
off to a sluggish start.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost 36 points
today to close at 21235.
The Nasdaq fell 32, and
the S&P 500 slipped two.
And the first family is
finally under one roof
again at the White House.
First lady Melania Trump and
the couple's 11-year-old son,
Barron, arrived Sunday night
to take up residence.
They'd stayed in New York
until the school year ended.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the former top U.S. diplomat
in China explains why he
broke ranks with the Trump
administration; Democrats speak
out about the way Republicans
are making decisions on health
care; a Lebanese militant group
gaining power as it fights
in Syria; and much more.
Last year, former President
Obama and China's President Xi
Jinping announced on the same
day that the U.S. and
China would join the
Paris climate agreement,
in an effort to forestall
climate change through capping
and reducing emissions.
China's participation
was seen as key.
It is the world's
largest emitter of carbon
dioxide, with the United
States running second.
But on June 1, this month,
President Trump announced his
intention to withdraw from the
agreement, citing possible
economic harm to the U.S. Four
days later, the top American
official in China, the charge
d'affaires in Beijing, tendered
his resignation, citing
the president's withdrawal.
His name is David Rank.
He served 27 years in
the Foreign Service.
And he joins me now
for his first interview
since leaving government.
David Rank, welcome.
You knew, when Donald Trump
was running for president,
that he had said that the U.S.
shouldn't be in
this climate accord.
What was your thinking then?
DAVID RANK, Former U.S.
Diplomat: Boy, I have served
five presidents over 27 years.
I have been through a lot
of presidential campaigns.
I have heard a lot of
things both about the
U.S.-China relationship
and about other issues.
I suppose I thought, boy,
that's bad idea but there are
a lot of bad ideas talked about
in presidential campaigns,
and we will see what happens
when he becomes president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, when
he made that announcement,
what was your reaction?
DAVID RANK: You know, Judy, up
until the day he -- in fact,
I would say the day before,
I -- it kind of
caught me off-guard.
It seemed so improbable that
the U.S. would pull out, because
Paris is a symbol of U.S.
leadership in the
region, in the world.
I mean, the benefits that
accrue from being a leader and
being in Paris just seemed to
be so obvious that it sort
of caught me off-guard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were
the benefits, in your mind?
DAVID RANK: Look, the -- how
many agreements are there in
the world where two countries,
now all but three countries
in the world, are members,
countries that are sort of the
closest partners we
have had for 70 years?
It's one of the most important
issues to those countries.
And so the benefits of being
the leader in that, of, as you
said, working together with
China to bring about, to
make the Paris agreement
possible, and being the
true leader on climate
issues, really is a
remarkable benefit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why does
climate matter to you?
DAVID RANK: Well, as I explained
to my staff when I went, not
only did it bother me from
the perspective of bad policy,
but also the obligation we
have to our kids and, frankly,
the moral obligation I feel
to take care of the planet we
have been given and the planet
we leave our children and
their children, and, you know,
realizing that if we -- from
all of those perspectives, ask
even to take very small steps,
I realized that I couldn't
do it.
I couldn't in good conscience
be party to the U.S. withdrawal.
And so we have a
disciplined service.
You either agree to
implement the president's
policy or you step aside.
And so that was the
solution I put forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, his argument
that this was doing economic
harm to the U.S., he talked
about draconian repercussions
for the U.S. thanks to the
accord, and he said he wanted
to negotiate a new
deal on climate?
DAVID RANK: I'm quick to admit
I'm not an expert on climate.
And had there been a serious
proposal, had we said, look,
Paris is -- instead of Paris,
we want to do X, Y or Z, you
probably would have changed
the way I looked at it.
There hasn't been any
real indication of that.
And I suspect -- well, I will
wait and see from the outside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How difficult
a decision is this for you?
You have been in the Foreign
Service for 27 years.
DAVID RANK: Yes, I love my job.
I love the people I work with.
I think -- I would like to
think I got up every morning,
and with a feeling of gratitude
for the ability to do what
I was doing, to serve the
American people, to work with a
group of colleagues who
were committed to the
same sorts of goals I am.
And it was tough.
It was very difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
you could have stayed.
And I guess did anybody make
the argument you could stay
and fight and stand up for
what you believe in?
DAVID RANK: Absolutely.
And I think there's
honor in that.
And I made the case to the
folks, because there are a
lot of people who I think, not
just in the embassy in Beijing,
but across the State Department
and across the government,
who are asking themselves,
if I fundamentally
disagree, what do I do?
And my answer to that
is, look, I have my own
particular personal situation.
I'm relatively close to the
end of my career, or I was.
I had been in for
almost 30 years.
But if you have got 20 years
ahead of you, then there's
real honor, honor to doing the
sort of tough work, the slow and
steady work that we as diplomats
and really people throughout
the U.S. government -- I
mean, that's the role of the
civil servant, the role of the
public servant.
And I think it is and
will continue to be
an honorable role.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last thing, and
separate from this decision,
how do you see the state of
relations right now between the
United States and China, with
President Trump pressing the
Chinese in particular to lean
on the North Koreans to pull
back their nuclear program?
DAVID RANK: I think we're early
in the Trump administration.
I think it's a positive
thing that the president
and his senior advisers
have made it clear
that it's an important
issue, that we have to
grapple with North Korea.
You know, it's not the only
issue between the United
States and China, but certainly
it is the one that is
on the front burner.
But I think it will
be a challenge.
It will take hard work every
day, not just by the president,
not just by the secretary
of state, but by the colleagues
of mine who are still in
Beijing and colleagues in the
State Department and
the Department of
Defense and elsewhere
in the U.S. government.
It's a real challenge
to the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Rank, the
former charge d'affaires at
the U.S. Embassy in Beijing,
China, up until, what,
about eight or 10 days ago.
DAVID RANK: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you very
much for talking with us.
DAVID RANK: Judy,
thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is an
important week for the fate of
a bill designed to replace and
potentially overhaul the
health care law often
referred to as Obamacare.
Republican senators are
trying to finish drafting
key portions of their own
bill affecting coverage
and costs.
But Democrats say the entire
battle over repealing the
law is quite different
from standard operating
procedure, and not nearly
transparent enough.
Lisa Desjardins looks at how
it's playing out in the Senate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right now
the debate over health care is
red hot in Congress, but only
behind closed doors, as
Republicans privately try
to craft a Senate bill.
And that is something Democrats,
like Senator Claire McCaskill
last week, have been raising
publicly.
SEN.
CLAIRE MCCASKILL (D),
Missouri: We have no idea
what's being proposed.
There's a group of guys in
a backroom somewhere that
are making these decisions.
There were no
hearings in the House.
I mean, listen, this is hard
to take, because I know we
made mistakes on the Affordable
Health Care Act, Mr. Secretary.
And one of the criticisms
we got over and over again,
that the vote was partisan.
Well, you couldn't have a more
partisan exercise than what
you're engaged in right now.
We're not even going to have a
hearing on a bill that impacts
one-sixth of our economy.
LISA DESJARDINS: McCaskill wants
something called regular order.
What is that?
Well, it used to be
the normal process.
A bill goes through committee
hearings, where experts and
those affected by an issue ring
in.
Then senators on the
committee can vote to change
the bill with amendments.
And then, when a bill gets to
the Senate floor, regular order
means another chance to change
it with amendment
votes there too.
In 2009, with the Affordable
Care Act, two Senate committees
held three months of hearings
and went through weeks
of voting on amendments.
More recently, Senate Leader
Mitch McConnell said he wanted
regular order when Republicans
took over in 2015.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: We need to open up,
open up the legislative process
in a way that allows more
amendments from both sides.
LISA DESJARDINS: But that's
not how Republicans so far have
planned this health care debate.
Again, in regular order,
bills go through committees
and amendment votes.
Instead, this time
around, Senate Republicans
have indicated they
may send their health
care bill straight to the
Senate floor with little,
maybe no chance to amend it.
And they have held no
hearings on the bill so far.
Leading this process is
Republican Senate Finance
Chairman Orrin Hatch.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: Well,
I don't know that there's
going to be another hearing,
but we have invited
you to participate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Who stressed
to McCaskill that he wants
Democratic ideas, if not more
hearings and votes.
But that differs from Hatch
in 2009, when Republicans were
the minority, and he thought
Democrats were moving
too fast on health care.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH: We at
least ought to take the
time to do this right.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the end,
it took Democrats 14 months to
pass their health care bill in
2009 and 2010.
That's why this
moment is critical.
The Senate will make or
break health care reform.
And Senate leaders, including
Hatch, have said they want
to pass a full health care
bill by the end of this month.
That's just nine or 10
legislative days away.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
it's Politics Monday, a look
at the week ahead for the White
House -- cancer screening tests
traditions in India; and why
professional baseball teams
are trying to win
over this baby.
But first: There is a new
and potentially-explosive
battleground shaping up
in Syria's civil war,
in the country's southeast, as
is retreats from its makeshift
capital, Raqqa, and the
larger fight for
Syria grinds on.
Along the border shared by
Syria, Iraq and Jordan, American
and British special operations
troops are training rebel
fighters -- operating
in close proximity,
forces from the Syrian
army, Russia, Iran,
and Hezbollah.
As special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports, the Lebanese
militant group is a unique force
in the shifting political
landscape in the Middle East.
While it has been integral to
the Syrian regime's survival,
it also remains committed to its
original goal, the
destruction of Israel.
JANE FERGUSON: Forged amid
the bloodletting of Lebanon's
civil war from 1975 to 1990,
Hezbollah was created to fight
Israel, whose army invaded and
occupied the country halfway
through the conflict after
attacks by Palestinian groups.
Hezbollah means Party of
God in Arabic, but members
often call themselves
simply the resistance.
It is a secretive militant
movement of the Shia sect of
Islam, largely funded and armed
by Iran.
To the U.S. and many of
its allies, Hezbollah is
a terrorist organization.
Inside Lebanon, it is regarded
as much a political and social
movement as an armed one.
In 2006, it fought Israel to a
bloody draw during a 33-day war,
which the militants declared
a victory.
It was celebrated around
the Arab world, where the
group's popularity rose.
After the war, with Iran's
help, Hezbollah reorganized to
become one of the most powerful
militant groups in
the Middle East.
In 2013, however, it entered
a much more controversial
war, stepping into
Syria's chaos to shore
up the regime of
President Bashar al-Assad.
Timur Goksel was the
spokesperson for the
U.N. peacekeeping mission
in Lebanon throughout
the civil war.
He has seen firsthand the
emergence of Hezbollah
and its evolution over
the years from a small
group of fighters to
a massive movement.
He's asking the same
question many others are.
TIMUR GOKSEL, Former U.N.
Spokesman: Why did Hezbollah
get so much involved in Syria?
Because of their love
for Bashar al-Assad?
I don't think so.
You have to think of what
is happening in Lebanon and
what are Hezbollah's concerns
for their own survival.
JANE FERGUSON: The answer to
that question lies in geography.
Designated by foreign
governments as a terrorist
organization, Hezbollah
is blocked from using
the sea and air.
To the south sits Israel,
with whom Lebanon is
still officially at war.
Hezbollah's weaponry
and financing comes
from Iran, across
Shia-dominated Iraq, through
Syria and into Lebanon.
The Shia axis, as it is often
called, would be broken if
the Sunni-dominated opposition
took over Syria.
TIMUR GOKSEL: For them, survival
of the Syrian regime, a friendly
regime in Syria, is Hezbollah's
existence.
It's their survival.
JANE FERGUSON: On the
battlefield in Syria, Hezbollah
has proved its effectiveness.
Those injured during battles in
Syria rely on the organization's
extensive network and
assistance.
The "NewsHour" was given
exclusive access to
this Hezbollah treatment
center in Beirut,
where the group's war wounded
from Syria received treatment
and physical therapy.
We were not allowed to
speak with these fighters,
but Imad Khoshman, who
lost a leg fighting
the Israeli army in the past
and now runs the center, told
us about the kind of injuries
he sees here.
IMAD KHOSHMAN, Runs Treatment
Center (through translator):
They are normally very painful,
such as spinal cord
injuries or in the brain.
They lead to a person being
paralyzed, not being able to
speak, not being able to move,
or losing limbs.
JANE FERGUSON: This young
fighter is recovering
from a devastating
head injury, struggling
to relearn names for
everyday objects.
However, the war wounded are
just one type of patient here.
The center mostly offers
medical care to civilians
from the local community.
It's all part of a policy
cultivated by Hezbollah's
leader, Hassan Nasrallah.
Since becoming the
group's leader in 1992
after Israel killed his
predecessor, Nasrallah
has expanded Hezbollah as a
militant group, and supervised
the creation of extensive social
programs for its community,
effectively creating a state
within a state inside Lebanon.
Hezbollah runs its own schools,
medical facilities and even
sports clubs across Lebanon.
They may also be used to
control that society, too.
Andrew Exum was the top Middle
East policy official at the
Pentagon at the end of the
Obama administration
and he lived in Lebanon
for several years.
ANDREW EXUM, Former U.S. Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense:
The services that Hezbollah
provides to its constituency
are services that, quite
frankly, the Lebanese government
has failed to
provide historically.
And, so, you can't blame
Lebanon's Shia constituency
for accepting the services
provided by Hezbollah.
On the other hand, it creates
a real dilemma for them when
they -- if they were to think
about ever moving
away from Hezbollah.
JANE FERGUSON: Hezbollah is
estimated to have lost over
1,300 fighters in the war, more
than they ever lost
fighting Israel.
Most of these women have male
loved ones fighting in Syria.
This woman lost a son.
As the mother of a man
seen as a martyr, her
emotions are complicated.
WOMAN (through translator):
The feeling of my son
being martyred is powerful.
He will attain a high position
in heaven for what he did for
us and for our dignity, even
though it is difficult.
Because he is my
child, it is difficult.
JANE FERGUSON: To followers
of Hezbollah, this sacrifice
is not made for politics.
It is a religious duty.
And that duty is absolute
devotion and loyalty to
the global Shia community's
guardian, regardless
of national boundaries.
Currently, that guardian is
Iranian cleric and supreme
Leader Ayatollah Khomeini.
Hezbollah has taken Iran's
side in the region-wide
rift between Shia Iran
and Sunni Saudi Arabia.
And Syria's war is
part of that rift.
Saudi Arabia and Iran
back opposing sides in
the sectarian conflict.
While Hezbollah's
supporters in Lebanon remain
loyal, its popularity in
Sunni countries across
the Middle East, which had
risen after the 2006 war with
Israel, has now plummeted.
The group is now perceived
as killing Sunni civilians
inside Syria on Iran's request.
ANDREW EXUM: They very much
played a role in the regime
tactics to isolate, surround
and starve out communities, and
the siege and ultimate fall of
Eastern Aleppo had Hezbollah's
fingerprints all over it.
JANE FERGUSON: But Hezbollah
claims it is fighting terrorists
in Syria and making sure
they don't cross
over into Lebanon.
IMAD KHOSHMAN (through
translator): Our fighters
are injured fighting
terrorists and protecting
our borders.
They are protecting our people,
our villages and our towns.
JANE FERGUSON: However, for
all it has lost in regional
popularity, the group has become
hugely strengthened militarily.
And it is capitalizing on
that by pursuing further
involvement in the region.
The group is also fighting
in Iraq, taking on the
Sunni extremists ISIS.
At the same time, the U.S.-led
coalition is also fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq, and
operating on the same
side as Shia militias,
including Hezbollah.
This indirect relationship
of convenience is an irony of
the war against the Islamic
State.
The Trump administration
has talked tough about
containing Iran, but
given little explanation
of how it would play a role in
curbing Iran and its ally here
in Lebanon Hezbollah, while
continuing to fight the
common enemy of ISIS.
America has long viewed
Hezbollah as a terrorist
organization and a deadly enemy.
In 1983, the group killed
241 U.S. servicemen in
Lebanon when it blew up
a U.S. Marine barracks.
Israel is anxiously watching
Hezbollah's evolution.
The Israeli military
has conducted airstrikes
against Hezbollah targets
inside Syria throughout
the war, although that hasn't
stopped the group from expanding
its arms supplies, which
could threaten Israel.
In February, Hezbollah leader
Nasrallah leader threatened to
strike a nuclear facility in
Israel.
HASSAN NASRALLAH, Hezbollah
Leader (through translator):
They know that, if rockets hit
this reactor, what would
befall them and their entity.
They are aware of the
risks which would be
inflicted on them.
JANE FERGUSON: Both Israel and
Hezbollah know a war between
them will bring more devastation
than ever before for
communities on each side.
This, for now, seems to
be the most effective
conflict prevention.
It is not one, however,
guaranteed to keep
this fragile truce.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson in Beirut, Lebanon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we mentioned
at the top of the program,
President Trump's agenda hit
another roadblock today when a
federal appeals court refused
to reinstate his travel ban.
Tomorrow, Attorney General Jeff
Sessions will testify in front
of the Senate Intelligence
Committee's open hearing
on Russia, all this
amid growing criticism
some fellow Republicans
over the weekend.
For more on how all of this
is affecting the White House,
we turn to Christopher Ruddy.
He's the CEO of the
conservative Newsmax Media and
a friend of President Trump.
Christopher Ruddy, thank
you for joining us again.
So, we know you have
been talking to folks
inside the White House.
Last week had to have been one
of the most difficult weeks
for this young presidency,
with the Comey testimony,
other matters out there.
How is the president,
how are his team doing?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY, CEO, Newsmax:
Well, I think they came out
of last week pretty good.
I spoke to the president late
last week, and I think he was
pretty optimistic about things
and happy that things -- I
wouldn't say overly happy.
But I also think that he
generally felt that he had won a
victory, that Director Comey's
testimony once again proved
that there was no obstruction.
The director doesn't want to
describe what the president
said to him as obstruction.
There is no evidence
of collusion.
We have a special prosecutor,
Judy, that has been appointed
here where there was never
an allegation of a crime
or evidence of a crime.
This is a very highly situation
-- highly unusual situation,
but it's also, I think,
politically driven.
And I think that that's getting
the president and a lot of
his top aides concerned that
there is an effort here
to undermine his agenda
in Washington by people
that want to focus
on these investigations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you're
saying it may be politically
motivated, but even Republicans
on the Senate Intelligence
Committee said of former
Director Comey's testimony that
they found him credible,
that they view him as
someone with integrity.
And he's the person who said
the president lied about the
situation at the FBI, and he
was afraid the president would
also lie about their meeting.
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Look, I think
Director Comey is a good guy,
but I also think he violated
bureau policy when he
held a press conference
explaining why he wasn't
going to indict Hillary
Clinton back in
June of last year.
The FBI doesn't indict people.
They just -- they're an
investigative agency.
I'm not sure why he gave
that press conference.
I think he violated FBI rules
when he interfered in the
election two weeks before.
He opened an investigation
into Hillary's e-mails.
The Democrats were very angry.
I think he violated FBI rules
again last week when he admitted
he leaked confidential documents
he compiled as the FBI
director to The New York Times.
Some people say that might
have been ethically very
bad, but also possibly
a criminal violation.
I just think that he
engaged in a very unusual
pattern of activity.
I'm not saying that everything
the president has done has
been right in this case, but
when you look at the facts,
you have to wonder, who
would you trust more here?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you
mentioned the special
counsel, Robert Mueller.
And you suggested -- I think I
heard you suggesting that there
is a question about the purpose
of his investigation.
I want to ask you about
that, because there
are some Republicans
out there saying that
Robert Mueller shouldn't
be doing this job.
Is President Trump prepared
to let the special counsel
pursue his investigation?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Well, I
think he's considering perhaps
terminating the special counsel.
I think he's weighing that
option, I think it's pretty
clear by what one of his lawyers
said on television recently.
I personally think it would
be a significant mistake, even
though I don't think there is
a justification, and even
though -- I mean, here
you have a situation...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You don't think
there is a justification for?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: For a
special counsel in this case.
But also -- I mean,
Robert Mueller, there
are some real conflicts.
He comes from a law firm
that represent members
of the Trump family.
He interviewed the day before,
a few days before he was
appointed special counsel with
the president, who was
looking at him potentially to
become the next FBI director.
That hasn't been
published, but it's true.
And I think it would be
strange that he would
have a confidential
conversation, and then,
a few days later, become
the prosecutor of the person
he may be investigating.
I think that Mueller shouldn't
have taken the position if
he was under consideration
and had a private meeting with
the president and was privy
maybe to some of his thoughts
about that investigation or
other matters before the bureau.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you know
for a fact that Robert Mueller
was offered another position
before he became
special counsel?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: I
know for a fact that he
was under consideration
and that the president
did talk with him in
the days before he was
named special counsel.
I think there's
a conflict there.
Look, my position is that
Mueller is a man of integrity,
but we all know in the history
of these special investigations,
they go far and wide, and
they go well beyond what the
original jurisdiction was.
He's bringing in some of the
top prosecutors that have worked
in the Justice Department.
This is not going to be
rosy for the White House.
And I have to look at -- when
you say there's no -- Judy, I
think we both have to agree,
so far, there's been no
evidence of wrongdoing.
There's been no allegation
that the president engaged in
wrongdoing or any member of his
staff did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
one other thing, Chris Ruddy.
And that is, the president's
declined so far to say one
way or the other whether there
is audio recording in the Oval
Office, in the White House, and
that whether his conversations
with Director Comey
could have been recorded.
Do you know whether there
is a recording system
in the White House?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: I hope not.
I don't want any
of my conversations
with him out there.
I don't know.
I can't remember half
the things I said to him.
But...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do you think
he has not - - why do you think
he has declined to clarify
that?
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY:
Well, I don't know.
I think he was -- the way I
interpreted the president's
remark was that, if there were
tapes, that they would vindicate
the president and not Comey.
I -- maybe he loves having that
out as a mystery out there, but
I'm not interpreting that that
there's actual physical tapes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
Chris Ruddy with Newsmax,
thank you very much.
We appreciate it.
CHRISTOPHER RUDDY: Great
to be on with you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to continue
our politics conversation,
we're joined now by Tamara Keith
of NPR and Stu Rothenberg,
senior editor at
Inside Elections.
Thank you both.
It's good to have you.
So, Tam, you just heard Chris
Ruddy, who does talk to people
in the White House -- he said
he talked to the president on
Friday -- say that he thinks
the president is considering
terminating Robert Mueller.
Is that something
we were aware of?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Certainly, there has
been stuff around on Twitter of
other Republicans raising
questions about Mueller.
But the way that Ruddy just
couched that, he made it
clear that -- and maybe he was
protecting himself and the
president, but he made it clear
that he was basing that on
something that one of the
president's lawyers had
said on TV over the weekend.
The other thing that stood out
to me is talking about Robert
Mueller having had a meeting
at the White House, having met
with the president, possibly to
take the job of FBI director,
which is a job he
had held before.
NPR and Carrie Johnson,
my colleague at NPR,
had been reporting that
Mueller had met with
Justice Department officials
and also White House officials.
But the idea that he also met
with the president himself
is new, to me at least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu
Rothenberg, this is --
these are -- the story
just keep bubbling up about
Mr. Mueller, Mr. Comey,
the president, the
Russia investigation.
This is a White House that,
this week, is trying to get
-- clearly get away from this.
STUART ROTHENBERG,
Inside Elections: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They have labeled
it Workforce Development Week.
What -- can they have -- can
they make any progress in
changing direction when you have
this kind of
conversation going on?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Right.
I think it's a great idea
that they should try to change
the discussion and narrative.
But, in this case, as
you point out, there's
too much is going on.
During Workforce Development
Week, tomorrow, we have the
Sessions testimony on the Hill.
We have two attorneys general,
one from D.C., one from
Maryland, announced that they're
going to sue the president
over the Emoluments Clause.
We had today the Ninth Circuit
Court issuing an opinion
upholding the travel ban.
It's as if the president has
already kind of broken so
many bottles and glasses that
there is glass strewn on the
floor and any step he takes,
he's going to crunch something.
So, I think it would be a
wonderful idea for the White
House to change the subject, but
you can see what happened
in the last 24 hours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Tam,
they're still trying.
Last week, it was
infrastructure week.
TAMARA KEITH: And
that was not...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Mr. Comey.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: And Mr. Comey
week is actually what it was.
And so the president
is flying tomorrow.
He's going to Waukesha,
Wisconsin, to tour a
technical college and talk
about apprenticeships.
On a slow news day, any other
president, that might sort of
be a headline, but it certainly
wouldn't be a
front-page headline.
If you're trying to distract
some very big headlines, going
to a technical college isn't
necessarily the answer.
Here's the other thing.
We have been trying to press
the White House to find out
what policy change the president
actually envisions or
they say that they want
more private-to-private
partnerships, to do
more apprenticeships.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Around this
work force development, right.
TAMARA KEITH: Exactly, around
this work force development.
But then they're saying, well,
you will have to wait until
Wednesday to find out exactly
what we're talking about.
And that's a long time to
wait and it's a long time to
expect people to pay attention
to something that is not related
to the biggest news of the day.
STUART ROTHENBERG:
Two other points.
One is, are there tapes?
That hasn't been answered,
so, every day, reporters
are going to ask that.
And the other thing
was, I think Chris Ruddy
made some news today.
He said the president is
considering the firing
of the special counsel.
Isn't that the next
week's discussion now?
So, it's hard for me
to believe that...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and we
couldn't tell - - as Tamara
was saying, we couldn't tell
if he was just referring to
what one of the president's
lawyers is saying, but the fact
that he said it has...
STUART ROTHENBERG: And the way
he said it, yes, absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: .. has
to make us wonder.
TAMARA KEITH: Stunning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
mentioned, Stu, you have got
the travel ban decision today
by the federal court.
There doesn't seem
to be good news.
I mean, health care reform
seems to be, at least for the
time being, slogged, stopped
up.
Stopped up, is that
the word in the Senate?
There is nothing happening yet.
Maybe it will happen.
We haven't seen a
tax reform plan.
Are we just going to
watch the news develop
every week like this?
And...
STUART ROTHENBERG:
Yes, I think so.
So, there is a problem
for the White House
on a number of levels.
The president wants to
change the narrative.
He also wants to
accomplish things.
He hasn't yet.
Maybe he will.
But one of the things I believed
for many weeks and months is
that he has to worry about
the fatigue factor on
the American public.
I remember thinking back to
Bill Clinton and all the drama
in the Clinton White House.
And after a while,
people thought, ay yi yi,
another thing we have.
Oy gevalt, as we say.
This is the same kind of thing.
It's -- there is another
crisis every day.
And after a while, people
just -- they don't want that.
They want things to
return to normal.
And Donald Trump's -- the
whole premise of Donald
Trump is upsetting normal.
Well, you can only do that if
you accomplish certain things
and people start to feel better
about themselves
and the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much do
they recognize this at the
White House, do you think, Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, they're
obviously trying to correct it.
They're trying to do things that
normal presidents do, like hold
a Cabinet meeting, as they did
today, though it turned into
somewhat unusual session of
every Cabinet head praising the
president in very effusive
ways that is sort of beyond
what would be normal for one of
these types of events, one
of these types of photo-ops.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to turn
you to something - - because
we do pay attention to parts of
the country, Stu, outside
of Washington occasionally.
But there are a couple
of elections coming up.
Tomorrow in Virginia,
there's a primary as they
choose their governor.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A week from
tomorrow, there's a much-watched
vote to choose the next member
of Congress from the 6th
District in Atlanta, Georgia.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes,
and I think that special
election is a really big deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think
Democrats have been hoping...
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Georgia.
STUART ROTHENBERG: In Georgia,
right, the Georgia 6th special.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Democrats
have been hoping for a victory
to take off over a Republican
seat.
This one was very close.
Donald Trump won it by
a point in November.
And the Democrats feel like they
have a great opportunity here.
And if they do, then we will
have another news story, another
data point that the White
House will have to respond to.
If the Democrats lose,
I think, after losing
in Kansas and Montana --
and, yes, the Democrats
kind of exceeded expectations
-- but losing in the Georgia
seat, there will be a sense
of just, are the voters really
turning on Donald Trump or not?
So I think it's a big
deal for both parties.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is the White
House watching that one?
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, absolutely
they're watching it.
And just today, President
Trump was saying, look, we did
well in Kansas, we did well in
Montana, Democrats think they
have something going on, but,
no, they don't, look at what
we have done.
So, the president himself
is watching this closely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he
said complimentary things
about Karen Handel, the
Republican candidate.
TAMARA KEITH: I think
he would take it as a
personal loss if she loses.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Because -- is it, Stu?
STUART ROTHENBERG: It would be.
It would be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A statement
about Donald Trump?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Oh, yes.
Neither Karen Handel, the
Democrat -- the Republican,
nor Jon Ossoff, the Democrat,
are perfect candidates.
They have raised a lot of money.
There is a lot of
energy, and most of it is
national money and energy.
But I don't -- think
there's no doubt.
If there was a Democrat in the
White House, I would expect
the Republican to win the race
easily.
And now, with a controversial
Republican in the White House,
no, this election is -- it's
about Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu Rothenberg,
Tamara Keith, this is
about the two of you.
Thank you.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: screening
for cervical cancer in places
where the disease rarely
gets priority, amid
other pressing problems.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro has a report on one
effort to prevent a disease
that afflicts about 500,000
women across the world every
year, but has the most deadly
outcomes in India.
It's part of his ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In a village
just outside Lucknow, India,
recently, there was a rare
opportunity for many women
like 35-year-old Kiran Rawat.
For the first time in her
life, she saw a doctor.
Her timing couldn't be better.
WOMAN (through translator):
There are some white spots
that I found when I applied the
medicine.
It's nothing to be afraid of.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
white spots are lesions.
If left untreated, they can
lead to cervical cancer in
women usually between 30 and 60
years old.
It is preventable and
treatable if detected early.
Yet, more than half the cases
worldwide are fatal, the vast
majority of them in developing
countries.
In India, cervical cancer claims
almost 70,000 lives a year,
more than anywhere else in the
world.
That's because, for millions
of women here, seeing a doctor
is the last resort, an often
unaffordable luxury.
But a pilot program run by the
global nonprofit Population
Services International, or PSI,
aimed to change that.
The organization set up medical
screening camps in Uttar
Pradesh, India's most populous
and one of its most
impoverished state.
Sixty women came to this one.
Four tested positive for
the pre-cancerous lesions
DR.
UMA SINGH, India: Pick
up a nice ball of cotton,
dip it in freshly made
acetic acid solution.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
In rich countries, Pap
smears and follow-up
treatment are the standard,
but that's neither affordable
nor practical here.
Instead, obstetrics professor
Uma Singh demonstrated
to students a low-tech,
low-cost alternative
being used in the pilot,
a simple swab of the
cervix with vinegar.
DR.
UMA SINGH: So, after one minute,
what you do is, do -- do the
inspection with good light.
So, if you see a white area,
you treat it by a procedure
which is called cryotherapy.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Literally freezing it off.
DR.
UMA SINGH: Yes, that's the
right word, freezing it off.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
lesions are a virus called HPV.
The patient can't see or
feel it, and the immune
system usually fights it off.
However, about one in every
100 infections turns cancerous.
Vaccines are available
and have proven effective
in preventing HPV.
But the cost puts them out of
reach of most Indian women.
DR.
SMITHA SINGH, India (through
translator): Don't be afraid.
I will remove them.
It's a very simple
thing, just 10 minutes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
approach here is to remove
any lesions right away.
There's no time or resources
to monitor or biopsy, no
assurance the women will return
for follow-up treatment.
It is likely that in many,
if not most cases, you are
over-treating the patient.
DR.
UMA SINGH: Yes, it may be a
little bit of over-treating,
but it has been seen that it
doesn't produce any substantial
harm to the woman in relation
to producing any long-term
effects on the cervix.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But, often,
women who test positive are
scared off by the prospect
of cryotherapy.
DR.
SMITHA SINGH: They feel a
big treatment will be done.
And at times, they do not
give consent for the cryo.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: PSI
canvasser Pinky Rawat says that
happens for a simple reason.
PINKY RAWAT, Population
Services International
(through translator):
They hear the word cancer
and they say, if I do have
cancer, what can I do?
They get very scared
when they hear cancer.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But even
as there's fear of cancer,
getting women to the screening
was a tough sell.
These women complained
that they need help for
far more mundane health
care issues, which
no one provides.
WOMAN (through translator):
My legs hurt all the time.
Give me something for my gout.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many women
labor in the field and in
households struggling to get
by, and they neglect
their own health.
SONI GUPTA, Population
Services International
(through translator):
It's affected my own
family.
It's been three months
since my mother died.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: PSI worker
Soni Gupta says early screening
and treatment might have
saved her mother, who
died from cervical cancer.
SONI GUPTA (through
translator): I feel terrible.
Even though I work in this field
for women, my own mother died.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Of the
four women who tested positive
for the pre-cancerous lesions,
the social workers the next
morning were able to find just
one willing to go in and get
treated.
WOMAN (through
translator): I'm afraid.
I have four children.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It was
Kiran Rawat who needed a lot
of coaxing and reassurance by
a PSI outreach worker.
WOMAN (through translator):
There's nothing to worry about.
It will just take a few minutes.
And you have my phone number.
You can call me for anything.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A few
minutes later, accompanied
by her husband, they
were on the way to Dr.
Smitha Singh's clinic.
Soon, the 10-minute
procedure was done.
WOMAN (through translator):
I was afraid at first.
But, today, no problems, right?
WOMAN (through translator):
No problem today, but I
didn't sleep all night.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The hope is
that she will help spread the
word and a culture of preventive
care, says Dr. Uma Singh.
DR.
UMA SINGH: So, it is
like motivating them to
go for the checkup for
prevention of cancer,
for hypertension, for diabetes,
for anemia and multiple things.
Then you have to ensure
that there have to
be good facilities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That much
larger job of building a better
public health system will
take time, but PSI says
its screening program
is set to scale up.
The state government has begun
to train workers to offer it in
all public health clinics based
on results in the pilot,
which concluded in January.
Seven thousand cases
were positive for the
pre-cancerous lesions.
About two-thirds of these
women had them removed.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
this is Fred de Sam Lazaro
outside Lucknow, India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.
Now to our "NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that may be of interest to
you, too.
Allegiances to sports teams
run deep in many families, but
one Virginia man decided to
let the nation's Major
League Baseball franchises
make their own pitch
for his son's affection.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia
Griffin explains.
PETE VAN VLEET, Father:
This photo is good for
two Astros tickets.
JULIA GRIFFIN: So, when are
you going to redeem that?
PETE VAN VLEET: If it were
up to me, we're having such a
good year, we'd go this season,
but that would be
unfair for Jack.
(CROSSTALK)
JULIA GRIFFIN: Right, because
he wouldn't remember it.
PETE VAN VLEET: He
wouldn't remember it.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Jack
wouldn't remember a Houston
Astros game because he
was just born in February.
And while his father, Pete Van
Vleet, is a lifelong Astros
fan, he wants Jack, like his
5-year-old daughter, Madeline,
to choose his own allegiance.
PETE VAN VLEET: I didn't want
to force anything on my own
kids, especially in the realm of
baseball, so I let them
pick their own team.
JULIA GRIFFIN: A few seasons
ago, Madeline picked Detroit,
reasoning that Tigers are
fierce.
PETE VAN VLEET: A friend of
mine asked when, after Jack
was born, is he going to be an
Astros fan?
I said, no, he can root
for whomever he wants.
And then it dawned on me, why
not let the teams have a say?
JULIA GRIFFIN: When
spring training got under
way, Pete, who, for the
record, is an employee
of PBS, mailed letters to all
30 Major League Baseball teams.
The query was
simple, but serious.
PETE VAN VLEET: "I want to
give you, the Pittsburgh
Pirates, the San Francisco
Giants, the Washington
Nationals, a chance to make
your own case as to why my
son should pick your team to
root for.
I must tell you, I do
not take this lightly.
Friends may come and go.
Political affiliations and
beliefs in higher powers may
change, but one's team is one's
team forever."
JULIA GRIFFIN: It wasn't long
before responses, or, arguably,
bribes, began to arrive.
From the Milwaukee Brewers, a
letter and autographed baseball.
PETE VAN VLEET: From Matt
Garza, their ace pitcher.
JULIA GRIFFIN: From
the Miami Marlins.
PETE VAN VLEET: "Billy
the Marlin, our mascot
is goofy, adorable and
is blatantly superior
to all other Major
League mascots."
So, if he's fishing
for a team, the Marlins
are a good one there.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Pittsburgh
Pirates president Frank
Coonelly wrote a personal note.
PETE VAN VLEET: "The Pirate
ship has plenty of room on it
for a young fan from Ashland,
Virginia."
JULIA GRIFFIN: Nationals
team manager Dusty Baker
sent pint-sized team
gear and an invitation.
PETE VAN VLEET: "We want to
get you started by inviting
you to our ballpark to catch a
game, visit the field
during batting practice,
and, of course, a
sharp outfit for you to
start your collection."
JULIA GRIFFIN: While the Chicago
Cubs sent an array of 2016
world champions memorabilia
and made a play for Madeline.
PETE VAN VLEET: "I know big
sisters have a lot of influence
over their little brothers,
so maybe you can help us
convince Jack to be a Cubs fan."
Why not?
That's very smart of them.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Not only did
they send all the swag, but
they are going after the sister
vote as well.
PETE VAN VLEET: Exactly.
JULIA GRIFFIN: A total of 13
teams have replied so far, but
have any knocked their argument
out of the park?
Is 4-month-old Jack persuaded?
There is a smile.
PETE VAN VLEET: Maybe that's it
JULIA GRIFFIN: Well,
for now, no comment.
Jack is just enjoying the
pennant pursuers' pursuit.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Julia Griffin in
Ashland, Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just shameless.
And I like the team that went
after -- I guess it was the
Cubs, who thought about the big
sister.
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we will wrap up
the testimony of Attorney
General Jeff sessions, who faces
senators of the Select
Committee on Intelligence.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.